they are boris johnson boris johnson the
prime minister
and uh his chief scientific advisor and
medical advisor
from downing street good afternoon
everybody and thank you for joining the
latest uh
cronovirus press conference yesterday
afternoon
i was briefed on the latest data that
shows
the virus spreading more rapidly in
london
the south east and the east of england
than would be expected
given the tough restrictions that are
already in place
and i also received an explanation for
why the virus is spreading
more rapidly in these areas it seems
that the
spread is now being driven by the new
variant of the virus which
we spoke about earlier this week and
learned about earlier this week our
advisory group on
new and emerging respiratory virus
threats
nerve tag has spent the last few days
analyzing this new variant
there's no evidence that it causes more
severe illness
or higher mortality but it does appear
to be passed on significantly more
easily
nerve tags early analysis suggests the
new variant could increase
the r by 0.4 or more
and although there's considerable
uncertainty it may be up to 70 percent
more transmissible than the old
variant the original version of the
disease this is
early data and it's subject to review
but it's the best that we have at the
moment and we have to act on information
as we have it because this is now
spreading
very fast the uk has by far the best
genomic sequencing ability in the world
which means we're better able to
identify
new strains like this than any other
country
the chief medical officer last night
submitted our findings
so far to the world health organization
will continue to be
totally transparent with our global
partners there's still
much that we don't know while we're
fairly certain
the variant is transmitted more quickly
there's no evidence to suggest it is
more lethal
or causes more severe illness equally
there's no evidence to suggest the
vaccine
will be any less effective against the
new variant
our experts will continue their work to
improve
our understanding as fast as we can so
we're learning about it
as we go but we already know uh enough
more than enough
to be sure that we must act now so
i met ministers on the coveted
operations committee last night
and again first thing this morning
cabinet met at lunch time
to agree the following actions
first we will introduce new restrictions
in the most affected areas
specifically those parts of london the
southeast and the east of england which
are currently
in tier 3. these
areas will enter a new tier 4 which will
be broadly equivalent to the
national restrictions which were in
place in england in november
that means residents in those areas must
stay at home apart from limited
exemptions set out in law
non-essential retail indoor gyms and
leisure facilities and
personal care services must close
people must work from home if they can
but may travel to work if this is not
possible for example in the
construction and manufacturing sectors
people should not enter or leave tier 4
areas and tier 4 residents
must not stay overnight away from home
individuals can only meet one person
from another household
in an outdoor public space
unlike the november national
restrictions communal worship can
continue to take place
in tier 4 areas and these measures will
take effect
from tomorrow morning all tiers will
continue to be
regularly reviewed in line with the
approach previously set out
with the next formal review taking place
on the 30th
of december second
we're issuing new advice on travel
although the new variant is concentrated
in tier four areas it is
nonetheless present at lower levels
around the country
so we're asking everyone in all tiers
to stay local people should carefully
consider
whether they need to travel abroad and
they should follow
the rules in their tier those in
tier four areas will not be permitted to
travel abroad
apart from limited exceptions such as
for work purposes
third we must i'm afraid look again at
christmas and as prime minister it's my
duty to take
difficult decisions to do what is right
to protect
the people of this country given the
early evidence we have
on this new variant of the virus the
potential
risk it poses it is with a very heavy
heart i must tell you we cannot
continue with christmas as planned
in england those living in tier 4 areas
should not mix
with anyone outside their own household
at christmas
though support bubbles will remain in
place
for those of particular risk of
loneliness or isolation
across the rest of the country the
christmas rules allowing up to three
households to meet
will now be limited to christmas day
only
rather than the five days as previously
set out
as before there will be no relaxation on
the 31st of january
so people must not break the rules at
new year
they must they must not break the rules
of new year it's very very important to
emphasize that
i know how much emotion people
invest in this time of year and
how important it is for instance for
grandparents to see
their grandchildren for families to be
together
so i know how disappointing this will be
but we have said
throughout this pandemic that we must
and we will be
guided by the science
when the science changes we must change
our response when the virus changes
its method of attack we must change
our method of defense
and as your prime minister i sincerely
believe there is no alternative
open to me without action
the evidence suggests that infections
would soar hospitals
would become overwhelmed and many
thousands more
would lose their lives and i want to
stress that we are not
alone in this fight or in taking these
types of
decisions many of our european friends
and neighbors
are being forced to take similar action
we're working closely with the devolved
administrations to protect people
in every part of the uk and of course
there is now real real hope
that we will soon be rid of
this virus and that prospect is growing
with every day that passes and every
vaccine dose that
is administered as you know the uk was
the first country
in the western world to start using a
clinically approved
vaccine and so please if the nhs
contacts you then get your vaccine and
join
the 350 000 people across the uk who
have already had
their first dose yes
christmas this year will be different
very different but we must be realistic
we're sacrificing the chance to see our
loved ones
this christmas so we have a better
chance
of protecting their lives so that we can
see them
at future christmases and
as sure as night follows day uh we'll
beat back this
virus will defeat it and reclaim our
lives but i'm gonna
hand over now to patrick who is going to
go through
some of the slides explaining this
decision
thank you very much prime minister may i
have the first slide please
this slide is the office for national
statistics
slide showing infections have risen
again in recent weeks
so it shows the percentage of positive
tests
against time and you can see from july
to september it was fairly flat
an increase occurred during september up
to a peak
after which the lockdown led to a
decrease in the numbers
during november and it is now on the
increase again
so the lockdown brought the numbers down
and now we're seeing them
rising again next slide please
this shows the levels
on the 29th of november up to the 13th
of december's on the left hand side
is the average cases in
in the last two weeks from the november
the 29th and on the right hand side
is in mid december the darker the color
the higher the number of cases and what
you can see
is first of all that there are some
areas that have got very dark
and here at south wales and in the
southeast of england
and that the overall cases have
increased by more than 50 percent
so a substantial increase in numbers
over
the period of december if i just
concentrate now
on the south east east and and london
we'll see a picture which i think begins
to link into the
new virus variant next slide please
so this is hospital admissions per day
in london the east of england and the
southeast from nhs data
from september through to now
you can see a gradual increase in the
number of hospital admissions per day
and you can see a very sharp increase
during december this virus has taken off
it's moving fast and it's leading
inevitably
to a sharp increase in hospital
admissions
next slide please
if we now look just at the areas that
are moving into tier
iv as the prime minister's just said
which is areas in london the south east
and the east
and look at the number of cases the case
rate against
time what you can see is the number of
cases
increase or the case rate increases
dramatically
if you look at the dotted line that's
for england as a whole you can see
case rate increasing to november
decreasing during lockdown and
increasing again
but if you look at the solid blue line
which is london
and the southeast and the and the east
in tier four you can see a rapid
increase
a very sharp increase in rates
uh uh over the period of december so we
have a particularly
fast-moving problem with increased
numbers
in the area gangs at tier 4 but a
generalized
increase across the country next slide
please
i'd like to just spend a moment talking
about the
new variant so the new variant
and viruses mutate all the time but the
new variant
contains 23 different
changes many of them associated with
changes in the protein that the virus
makes
this is an unusually large number of
variants
it's also got variants in areas of the
virus
that are known to be associated with how
the virus binds to cells and
enters cells so there are some changes
which cause concern in terms of how the
virus looks
but on top of that there are three
questions that need to be asked
does the tr does the new variant
transmit more readily i.e does it make
an increased chance of spreading growth
the second is does it alter the course
of the disease does it make people
sicker
and the third is does it alter the way
that the immune system the way the body
responds to it
if it's been previously infected or
following the vaccine
i want to deal with the first question
there are three different sources of
evidence
from genetic studies to frequency
studies
to laboratory studies all of which come
together to suggest this virus
has a significant substantial increase
in transmissibility
and this is also highlighted in this
graph which shows the proportion
of all the cases that were due to the
new variant
so the new variant was first thought to
have occurred sometime in mid-september
in london or kent and by
the middle of november about 28
or so of the cases in london and the
southeast
and slightly lower in the east of
england were due to the new variant
so it had grown rapidly by the week
commencing the 9th of december these
figures were much higher
so in london over 60 percent of
all the cases were the new variant so
what this tells us
is that this new variant not only moves
fast
it is increased in terms of its ability
to transmit
but it is becoming the dominant variant
it is beating all the others
in terms of transmission so this virus
transmits and spreads fast
does it alter the disease program
disease course
the answer seems to be no as far as we
can tell at the moment there's no
evidence
it causes a more severe disease causes
more hospitalization
causes more trouble than the other virus
so
it basically looks similar
does it alter the immune response or is
the immune response less able to
recognize it
there are theoretical reasons to suspect
that some of the changes
might alter some of the immune responses
but there's nothing that's been seen to
suggest that's the case
and our working assumption at the moment
from all the scientists
is that the vaccine response should be
adequate for this virus that's
obviously needs to be looked at going
forward and we need to keep vigilant
about this
but the big change therefore is not
disease progress
not the immunity but transmission this
virus spreads more easily
and therefore more measures are needed
to keep it under control
we absolutely need to stick to the
basics
of making sure that we reduce our
contacts reduce the ability for this
virus to spread
and that's the reason that tougher
measures are required to keep this
variant under control thank you very
much
thanks very very much patrick chris is
there anything you want uh
to add to any of that and well thank you
thank you but thank you very much then
let's go to
questions from the public and then the
and then the media uh first laura from
worthing why are shielded still expected
to work
in two or three as somebody who's
already lost two loved ones to covid
this terrifies me
thank you is
well laura um i i
your question why shielders are still
expected to work in
uh in in tier three uh those who
are shielding those who uh are
vulnerable
uh should of course take every step to
to protect themselves and
uh laura i hope very much that you'll
not ask being asked to work if you're
uh if if you're shielding chris anything
you want to add to that
well i mean i think the first thing to
say is i'm really sorry to hear about
your two relatives who died from this
virus i mean it is a very dangerous
virus for many people
the shielding uh patterns are actually
uh
being re-looked at but the the view
about
uh shielding is that in the first wave
uh shielding did many things that were
useful but also did many things that
were
actually actively harmful and we have
therefore changed the model
uh of t of shielding since the first
wave
and that includes uh people being able
to get out more in many situations
and also areas around work but this is
uh something which people are keeping on
looking at
to try and get the optimal balance
between isolating people too much
and isolating enough from the virus
thanks very much uh let's go to mike
from from cheshire
mike from cheshire asks in in the daily
update figures people testing positive
number of tests deaths and so forth
could you also provide
the number of people who've had the
vaccine um
well mike thanks for that and uh yes
as you've heard uh from me just now uh
the the figure
that i've been given uh today is is 350
of so far had their their first uh their
first dose
uh and we'll we'll make sure that we
keep people regularly updated on the
uh on the rollout of the vaccine uh
let's go to
uh laura kuhnsburg of the bbc um thank
you very much
prime minister there were calls for you
to drop the plans for christmas
last week just a few days ago but on
wednesday you told me and our viewers it
would be inhuman
to change the plans and now that's
exactly what you've done
aren't there millions of people whose
plans have just been torn up
entitled to feel that you just left this
too late
and you've caused them more personal
disruption and upset by doing so
and can i ask the medics you've shared
some of the analysis of this new variant
but you mentioned that port and down
have been looking at this in the earlier
press conference this week
can you say if port and down have
completed their assessments of it
and professor woodsy if someone is
packing a bag right now listening to or
watching this
trying to leave the southeast by
midnight tonight what should they do
well uh lauren let me first of all just
say to everybody
uh who's made plans for christmas as i
said earlier on everybody who's thought
about it
all the care and love that's gone into
plans for for christmas
we of course bitterly i regret the the
changes that are that are necessary but
alas when the facts change uh you have
to change your approach and
uh the the briefing that i had yesterday
about this mutation
of the virus particularly about the
speed of of transmission
uh was not possible to ignore and
when the as i say when the virus changes
its method of
attack we as a as a country have to
change
our method of defense and that's what
we're doing
shall i take uh the one that was
addressed directly to me and then sir
patrick may want to talk about
port and dan um i want to put some
numbers out there because i think that
helps to explain why
i'm going to give the answer that i'm
going to give but my short answer would
be
please unpack it at this stage and
the reason for that is if you look at
the southeast if you look at the east of
england and look at london
there's been a really dramatic increase
in the proportion of the cases that we
see
that are when we do on the screening
tests which uh not absolutely exact but
pretty accurate would imply that in the
southeast
43 percent of the virus is now this new
variant
uh in the east of england it's 59
percent uh and in london 62
the numbers may vary slightly but those
numbers are broadly right and
those have gone up very very fast over
the last few weeks
so this has really gone incredibly
quickly they are much lower
in other areas of the country and then
when you look at the rates of
increase in hospitalizations there have
been the numbers of people
in hospital across the country what you
see is in the areas where this is very
very common
you're seeing rates of increase of maybe
36 percent in the east of england
34 in london and 28
in the southeast these are the areas
which had actually have
significant numbers of this new variant
but if you go to let's say the north
west and the northeast and yorkshire
in these areas there has been no
increase in hospitalizations they're
they're managing
to keep things down with tier three and
if you look at the rates
of this new variant in those areas uh
you see
uh they're much lower so for example in
yorkshire and humber
around five percent now again the exact
numbers don't matter but the point is
that if you have a lower mountain amount
of this variant the rate of increase is
held by the tiers
if you have a very high rate of this
variant then
it is not held sufficiently by the tiers
and it is going up rapidly and our big
worry
is essentially this is growing in two
directions it's growing up in terms of
the percentage where it is
so it's getting a higher and higher
proportion of the cases
and as patrick said the chance if
someone gets infected
of them having to go to hospital or
dying at the end of it
seem to be roughly the same as far as we
can see so far
as the previous variant and if they were
to go with this new variant
unwittingly to an area that has a low
prevalence and start
this being seeded even more outside
the high prevalence areas that would be
a significant risk
to the area they went to so that is the
reason we are really keen that people do
not go
from these areas because otherwise we'll
not only see it going up in the areas
it's already a problem
we'll see it going out to other areas of
the country where it currently is not a
problem
and that it was because we understood
this information in the back end of this
week
that we advised you really do have to
act at this stage
because this is this is otherwise every
area of the country will get this very
quickly
and then none of them will be able to
hold things with uh tier three and tier
two elsewhere
thanks very much uh uh laura robert
personally to
oh sorry don't you give me a question
sorry just to answer the port and down
question um
important dan are looking at this all
the time um when data become available
we'll make sure we get it out as
soon as we can but we don't have any
more information that we've shared today
thanks very much laura let's go to
robert person itv
and your polygons say john edmonds has
just sent me
a statement saying that as far as he's
concerned this is the worst
moment of the epidemic because of the
extraordinary infant
infectivity of this new strain do you
agree
with professor edmunds
we saw the virus rising
in kent during the lockdown
and during tier three why didn't you
take evasive action then
to close down kent even before you knew
that there was a new strain and what
confidence do you have
that the new tier four measures will
suppress the virus given that
the lockdown did not suppress it in kent
well come perhaps i can just give a
layman's answer uh
robert because i think the the whole
point is that we were
we were very puzzled during uh the the
november the fifth to december the third
uh autumn measures by why the tier three
uh system wasn't delivering the results
in
uh in kent that it was delivering an and
uh
a couple of other places that it was
delivering uh for instance in the
in the northwest and the and uh
clearly there was something going on
it's not really i think it'd be fair to
say until
yesterday as we've seen this data on
transmissibility uh that we've really
got the
the answer that uh uh explains it
and today's action is a is a
is a response that that change in the
science that's my that's my
like my layman's answer yeah i mean is
it the worst moment well i'm afraid
there have been so many terrible moments
in this epidemic this is
another one but i i have to say that in
my own view this is not the worst moment
in the epidemic
and the reason for that is although this
virus is more transmissible and we must
do everything we can which is what the
prime minister has announced
to keep it as constrained as possible
keep it down as much as possible so it
does not spread
we do have medical countermeasures we
have a vaccine already being rolled out
as the prime minister said
and therefore there is a prospect
relatively in the
the sort of medium term future where
things could be
quite a lot better and if you think back
to the uh the dark days at the end of
march and april
not only were the numbers going up
incredibly fast the mortality was
actually higher
than now because medica medical
treatment has got better
but we had no uh vaccines on the horizon
here they were in the far horizon
so i think this is a situation which is
going to make things a lot worse
there are some there are some really
optimistic things if you look
once we get the vaccine out assuming
that the vaccine works against this
which i think at the moment is our
working assumption
and that is you know we really must hold
the line and my view and patrick will
want to add to this
is what we must absolutely do is slow
this down absolutely as much as possible
and the if we can take it down from a
doubling time of every seven days which
it is in many areas
which is really fast if you think about
that compounding up
and pull it right out even if we don't
manage to put it all the way down and we
hope we will
at least then we're not going to have
this skyrocketing number we're not going
to have the numbers spreading out across
the
country and that will give us a chance
to get the vaccine out
and protect the most vulnerable people
so that if it does then escape
what we have is the barrier of the
vaccine to help uh protect them but that
so i think you know this is a bad moment
that's the reason the decisions have
been taken by the
prime minister and and uh ministers uh
but
uh there is at least this prospect uh in
the future
yeah i i agree with that i mean this is
a horrible moment for sure
um i think we should though thank that
we've got
the uh genetic sequencing consortium
that's actually got onto this very fast
and found an explanation of what was
going on i think that's really important
that we got that and we'll continue
to utilize that resource in the uk
and we know what needs to happen to try
and slow this down and it's the basic
things i mean
although this is complicated in many
ways in other ways it's really simple
reduce contacts do the basics
face hand space make sure that that is
what we do to try and resist the ability
of the
virus to spread from one person to
another and it will slow it down
and and that's what we need to make sure
we get on top of as chris said i think
this will slow it down
and we need to make sure we keep a lid
on this it's not a good moment for sure
but it's one that's controllable and as
chris said there is an
important light at the end of the tunnel
with vaccination having started
thanks very much both uh and and thanks
robert let's go to samco to sky news
prime minister this decision will be
upsetting for millions of people so
could you just speak directly to
everyone suddenly now spending christmas
day
alone what what hope can you give
them and similarly what's your message
to people considering gambling and
breaking the rules
and funny how long realistically do you
think everyone will have to stay in tier
four is there any chance it's in place
until enough people have had
a vaccine and to the two scientists
is the new strain impervious to social
distancing measures might the
two meter rule and existing face
coverings no longer be enough
to protect people would you travel in a
train carriage through kent tonight
well um thanks very much uh sam
obviously the
these measures as i say will be reviewed
like all the others every uh every two
weeks
uh and uh there'll be a chance for
for parliament to consider them
obviously as long as all the other
tiering
questions at uh at the end of at the end
of january
obviously people should not uh break the
rules
obviously people should follow the the
guidance i hope very much that uh
elderly or lonely people who are able to
form uh
bubbles who have household bubbles will
be uh will be uh have that consolation
that's that's clear from what we've said
uh today
but i suppose what i would say to
everybody who's
now thinking of having a much reduced uh
christmas uh
of course uh we bitterly regret that
this is necessary
this year i know how much life and care
and thought goes into
preparations for for christmas i suppose
the message is
you know that this is the year to lift a
glass to to those who aren't
there in the knowledge that it's in it's
precisely because
they aren't there to celebrate christmas
with you this year
that uh we all have a better chance that
they'll be there
next year to celebrate christmas with
you i suppose that would be my
my message sam uh to the country
in terms of the uh the social distancing
yes social distancing does work it
doesn't work as a yes no
the more things you do the more more
determinedly you do them
the more people do the basics for
themselves all the things patrick talked
about the hands face space things
but also break unnecessary household
links
the more this and every other
respiratory virus goes down and just to
give some
other examples for example flu rates are
down adenovirus
rates are down because they also have
exactly the same effect on other
respiratory viruses
we do not think that the current
measures will not work against this
but we're going to have to do a lot more
more in a sense the standstill it's like
you were cycling up a steep hill and now
you've got the wind against you as well
you just have to do that much more to
actually keep going and that's really
what we're going to have to do but the
actual tools
themselves unfortunately remain the same
tools and would i go through
kent not unless he was absolutely
necessary not because i don't love kent
kent is fantastic but because this is
not the moment with this virus
circulating to have unnecessary travel
so only if there was a very good reason
thanks very much uh sam let's get a
chris hope of the day telegraph
chris you need to un unmute i think
can see you
can you hear me yes got you forgive me
for that um how old is the police prime
minister do you
think he should be stopping people from
traveling outside of tier four
and do you advise police to knock on the
door of households that break these
rules on christmas day
and are these an admission that the
tears have failed are we back to
essentially lock down
until march and just for the scientists
and and medics
i wonder why britain has got this one so
bad this variant so bad
which other countries have it and how
does the new variant get here please
well chris first of all i think the
police have done an amazing job of of
uh enforcement light touch enforcement
they've handed out lots of uh
of fpn's fifth penalty notices for
breaches of the
of the rules but they've also uh helped
to keep people overwhelmingly
uh in line with what they need to do and
that's you know i really thank the
police
uh men and women up and down the country
for what uh for what they're doing i'm
sure they'll continue to do it in the
same way
uh throughout this period but i'm sure
above all i think people will
naturally uh want to do it themselves as
they've done throughout this
uh throughout this crisis the bulk of
the population uh take this incredibly
seriously
uh get it right um and and uh they'll
continue to do so
in terms of the the question about why
here and and where else is it
viruses mutate all the time so lots and
lots of mutations of the virus around
the world
this one is a particular constellation
of changes which we think is
important um i think
they'll arise for every time a virus
replicates it can make a mistake and so
that some of these things just arise by
chance the question is what's advantage
it gives the virus and this one seems to
give an advantage of transmissibility
um we think it may be in other countries
as well
we think it probably is based mainly we
think there's a large outbreak in the uk
it may have started here we don't know
for sure
um there will be other types of
mutations around the world it's very
important that this sequencing effort to
try and find out
what the sequence is doing how much has
changed look is looked at at a global
level and we start to get a handle on
where these changes are occurring
in the virus across the world it's going
to be an important part
of surveillance going forward bro thank
you nigel nelson sunday mirror
one for the prime minister um given you
were at least
aware that there was a new variant of
the virus out there as far back as
november
do you now feel it was reckless to
promise
five days of christmas against
scientific advice
and if i asked chris whittier question
earlier in the week you were talking
about keeping
meetings at christmas time short without
specifying what short was
can you say now for tiers 1 2 and 3
whether that should be seeing granny for
a cup of tea for an hour
a two-hour christmas lunch or four hours
going to sleep over the telling
well no no nigel first of all thank you
very much but
we've always taken account of scientific
advice always
i've tried to follow it and that is what
we're doing today because the
the science is clearly uh changing and
has changed
in the sense that our understanding of
this new virus its transmissibility
uh has been radically shifted uh just in
the last 24
hours and certainly the understanding of
of the people before you uh here this
afternoon and
uh we we simply can't ignore that and
that's why we're
we're taking these extra steps today to
protect the country
and answer the question you put to me um
i mean what what i
said and i have i i'm very happy to
repeat it
is to the extent you possibly can keep
it small
keep it short keep it local and remember
the vulnerable
are vulnerable and that is still
absolutely the message
so if you've got your grandmother you
really want to minimize the amount of
contact you want to keep it at a
distance
you do want to have the shortest period
you can
because what you really want is to get
to the point when your grandmother has
been vaccinated
ideally when you and people around you
been vaccinated taking the risk right
down at that point we have we're in a
different place
but at this point in time at this really
really critical and dangerous time
uh pre-vaccine but high uh transmission
i i would repeat it keep it small keep
it short
keep it local and remember the
vulnerable and short should mean as
short as you can
manage with a reasonable social
interaction and i think one way to think
about it is assume you could be
infectious
i mean it's not somebody else's issue
it's your own
issue you might be infectious and that's
the way that we have to behave at this
moment
assume you might be infectious yes it
can't be stressed
too often that you a lot of the
transmission
of the the infection is uh by people who
don't have
symptoms at the time and i don't think
people who have
still now fully get that in in the way
that perhaps they
they need to it's absolutely vital i
think to i think one in three
uh in his infections are transmitted
asymptomatically uh still and people
really need to
to realize that can we go to uh anime
kylo
of the mail on sunday prime minister you
said earlier
that when the facts change you have to
change your approach but the facts three
days ago were you knew about the new
strain and you knew that infections were
rising
and still you said it was too late to
cancel christmas
how do you expect people to follow the
rules when they keep changing and
secondly another question for you prime
minister
have you put are you going to put any
additional support in place for
businesses and shops that i have to
close now
thanks uh on the just on the on the
uh the facts of the of the science uh i
think we've tried to to spell out this
afternoon
uh what has changed and what has changed
is the uh the velocity
of transmission our understanding of how
fast this disease is
is transmitted and uh the susceptibility
of people to getting it
uh as i say nerve tag uh thinks it's up
to 70 percent
more transmissible now than the old
variant
we simply can't ignore that that's data
that's been in our possession now for
a day or so we have to act to protect
the the public and
obviously anna we will do everything
that we uh can
as usual to look after business to look
after jobs and livelihoods throughout
the
the pandemic uh and we'll continue to do
that with
the the loan scheme with the with
following which uh the chancellor has
now extended
uh right the way through to uh to the
end of april uh we'll continue to
to look after your businesses that are
forced to to close as as a result of
uh what's alas uh is is happening
uh they will receive uh the uh the
protections
uh that uh we have put in place the
loans uh the grants that we put in we
put in place
and we'll continue uh with all that but
i want to stress that this is a
this is still a this is a race and uh we
still
are doing our absolute level best to
protect the
the public uh whilst we know that the
vaccine is arriving
and i'm very very confident more
confident than than ever
that we'll get that vaccine into a
significant proportion of the population
uh by the spring and that things will be
radically different
uh for our country uh by easter i've
absolutely convinced that and and
although uh this is unquestionably uh a
uh a difficult moment in the campaign
against uh
against this this virus in the struggle
against this virus
those fundamental facts that fundamental
reason
for optimism about the progress that we
have made
that remains unchanged thank you all
very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app
and get the full story with bbc dot co
dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news